To science fiction lovers, if there are any mathematicians in the crowd who are purest
in the way the word infinity is used, I apologize in advance, but I warn you, if you get too
rough on me, I'll fight back.
My claim is that science fiction is an infinite activity, but there is no end to it.
It can go on forever and ever.
For our men, people can keep writing new stories, working out new ways of having fun with the
business, painting new pictures, I don't care how, making up more movies, plays, television
things, there is no limit.
This is my opinion for what it's worth.
I'm going to spend the rest of the yak in trying to defend it.
To do so, I'll have to stretch things perhaps a little bit.
I'll have to include in science fiction stuff that isn't pure, correct, hard, solid science
fiction such as I always write.
I'll have to let in occasional things which even have errors in them, horrid thought.
Like the notion that a planet which spins rapidly enough could have an elliptical cross-section
and have three G's at the equator and six hundred at the poles, you know.
Since it became easy to steal computer time, lots of people have checked up on me on that one
and apparently Mestlin would have come to a point at the edge.
Don't blame me.
I couldn't get hold of a computer in 1952.
So the errors will have to come in and they will ease very gradually over the edge into
what is frankly fantasy.
I don't really care where the line is drawn, but as long as we put this stuff all together,
I still think there's no end to it.
Now the mistakes cropped up even way back in the beginning in the days of Jude Fern when I was young.
And the first of the slides represents an interesting story which all of you have read,
but not this version of it.
It seems there was a hero who had a scientist friend and a girlfriend who in this particular
version was not the scientist's daughter and he had a very wicked enemy.
And the enemy came bouncing around to kill him and fired a bullet and the young lady
heroically thrust herself in the way and what with one thing and another,
there was a bullet lodged beside her spine.
And it just happened that the hero had recently invented a device for reducing human beings
and other things to extremely small size.
And this was published when Isaac Asimov was 14 years old.
He didn't write it.
It is called A World Unseen.
It was written by Joseph William Skidmore.
It appeared in one of the stories in I think the February and April issues of 1934,
but I could be a bit out.
There's another first fandom type over there who can always check me up.
That's close.
My memory is perfect.
Okay, good.
When I speak of errors, I don't say that maybe someday someone won't reduce things in size
through some horrid bypassing of the laws of quantum mechanics.
At the same time, I'm extremely doubtful that a type word term really looks like that.
And before you blame artist Paul, the author described the various organisms which were
met with and this delicately nurtured and healthy young lady's body in considerable detail.
And the illustration wasn't all that bad.
As far as the description went, there were fangs and glaring eyes of what a typhoid germ or
maybe this was the tetanus one.
I don't really remember now.
Would be doing with eyes.
I'm not entirely clear considering the amount of light probably available.
Anyway, it was a nice adventurous story.
I enjoyed it when I read it back in my middle teens.
And I didn't find it all that bad when I re-read it a few years ago after I latched
onto a couple of copies of the magazine again.
Don't think I got them from you, Howard, sorry.
Anyway, in this whole theme, the story, was the question.
Are you entertaining somebody?
Maybe you aren't.
If he's the sort of person who wants every story he reads to have a moral or a political
point or something of that sort.
But even something like this can be entertaining.
And it's one little fragment of insanity.
Okay, let's see if it changes faster today.
Yeah, it does.
I'm getting some things out of the way.
Remember, I have been an astronomy nut for 47 years.
From the beginning to me, science fiction was rocket chips and Martians.
And I'm simply proving for the first few slides that I'm not a completely closed mind type.
You can have science fiction in other places.
And this slide in the next, for example, going to the question of how about re-engineering
human beings so they can breathe water.
This was Norman Knight's story.
And well, the date's all there.
I don't have to brag about my memory this time, Christ is in Utopia.
And one could do a little bit of criticizing about those foreign type kills for a number of reasons.
But I won't.
Another theme, a variation of the same theme, and here's what I'm starting into.
The infinite variations is in the next slide.
This had nothing to do with genetic manipulation.
Okay, let's have the next one.
This was an accident.
And having been written by Sprague de Camp, it was a rather humorous accident.
And for aquarium assistant to have been experimenting in his spare time on a drug
that would alter lung tissue sufficiently to permit an air breath that would breathe under water,
and accidentally got a few whiffs of his own drug and found he couldn't breathe air,
and was running off for help from his office after the aquarium head,
passed out from lack of air, fell into a dark tank, and had problems for the next 24 hours or so.
As I say, with Sprague, it was more funny than serious science.
But Sprague stuck with the custom of the time and came up with a fairly
logical sounding excuse for the whole thing.
He remembered details like handling the reflex, which would ordinarily prevent
a person from breathing water.
We do have some automatic controls there, which are supposed to keep water out of the windpipe.
And once again, it was a good story.
But let's get on closer and closer to the rocket ships and Martians.
So I don't remember just what comes next, and I can't continue the talk until it does.
Okay, this is still a way back lamp.
The next three slides deal with Jack Williamson's Legion of Space,
pure beautiful formula type space opera, which I love then and I love now,
about which you could start branching out on,
all right, so I ended the phrase with a preposition, indefinitely.
In this particular story, they were chasing off to Bernard's Runaway Star to preserve the solar
system from the pirate Medusa, and incidentally to save the girl who had been kidnapped and
zipped off to the star to get the secret of the invincible weapon from her.
This was the 1930s.
The point is that
that same story could have been written and probably has been written,
not only with other variations, but from various other viewpoints.
Now, the Medusa, the Megans of Barnard's Star, and that's supposed to be Barnard's Star,
were the villains.
They, actually, Jack was not as ruthless as he sometimes is.
He had destroyed the Earth's moon and wiped out the outpost of the Medusa there at the end of
the story, but as far as I know, he allowed Barnard's Star to continue on its way,
the Medusa is still there.
I wouldn't know, I had just a little touch of sympathy for those critters.
I didn't blame them for wanting to move from this place.
Let's go on to the next picture while we're at it.
And I didn't blame them particularly for defending their planet with the belt of peril,
which Jack described in such detail.
There were refugees from their own environment, as Jack described it, but you could be sorry for
them.
There was only one city full of them left before creatures.
The city is in the next picture.
And you could write a lot of stories about the Medusa's side of the affair,
or what the Medusa did before, or what the Medusa did afterwards.
It's branching.
This is my point, these branches.
And as soon as you write one of those stories, it's going to branch, too.
So let's keep on with the branches.
Don't blame me for the description there, by the way.
I don't know how you could get a sky that red.
Jack said that there was an organic aerosol designed to trap the heat, which made the sky
look red.
So the picture was painted with a red sky.
Don't let that worry you.
You've all read at least some of Spratly Camp's Krishna stories.
This is an illustration from the Hand of Zay, a time in which the Shambor was
fleeing a couple of pursuing valleys and aided through a straight two shallow
for the valleys by taking advantage of the fact that Krishna's three moons all happened
conveniently to be full and in conjunction simultaneously.
It made a nice picture.
And it made a nice story.
But variations again.
Well Sprat did so many of the variations.
There's no point in pursuing that thing.
You've read Rogue Queen, Get Along, Tower of Zanad.
Rogue Queen was the most popular, but I'm not entirely sure it was the best.
It was very good.
Okay.
Well, I have to get myself into it too here and there.
Some of you may or may not recognize the same.
We hope for the best.
This is the Sunless Planet all the way in, which you've been a story for the first of the stellar
anthologies.
It was in the vicinity of the Orion Nubbiler, which shows in the background.
This is the point near the beginning of the story where the native is pausing to catch dinner.
You remember he had an interesting personality, which he didn't have all that self-control
when it came to satisfying his hunger.
And his human passenger was in no position to be in a hurry because you never quite knew
how you'd want to satisfy his hunger.
So he permitted the fellow to stop and catch a fish to eat it.
The next painting shows the planet itself.
This was the point I started as far as I know.
Yeah.
Next one if you can.
The Possibility of Sunless Planets.
Well, I didn't really start it.
Neilar Jones had one of his Professor Jameson stories back in 1934, December 34, and I know
because it's the first magazine I ever bought.
However, dear Mr. Jones, fondness I have always been of the Professor Jameson stories
didn't know all that much science.
And his Sunless World was hollow, which is extremely difficult to justify on any astrophysical grounds.
I came up with the notion that any sort of reasonable theory of planet formation and star
formation suggests strongly that there should be lots of objects out there, which are too small
to be suns.
And you may as well call them planets.
And if they're sufficiently late generation objects, such as something in the Orion Nebula
might be, they could easily have enough heavy elements, uranium and thorium, so that at places
on their surfaces, they might be warm enough to have liquid water or in this particular case,
I think I use liquid hydrazine.
That's what the hell, just a variation.
Some science fiction writers are very, very ethical in that connection, by the way.
I had started a story on this theme somewhere in the early 1960s.
I ran into Paul Anderson at a AAAS meeting and told him about it.
I'd gotten tied up and it died on me.
And if I could finish, I got my character into a hole that I couldn't get him out of.
This was a rewrite of it, but I had to start over.
And I told Paul about this and Karen and we were talking however, how I could get out of it.
Paul, believe it or not, felt that he should write Sunless World Stories because I had come up
with the idea.
Well, that's being too damn ethical.
I'm all for ethics, but as far as I'm concerned, Sunless planets are probably a fact of nature
and I have no copyright on them.
And if any of you want to write stories about Sunless Worlds, fine.
If you want to write stories about all between them,
write me and I'll give you more of its specifications.
I'm all for it.
Let's pursue the variations.
Let's get a little closer to infinity and if any mathematician shoots, I'll shoot back.
That's, at least I could recognize it from a glance.
That's one of the standard far future ones, but one of the better done far future ones.
That's the earth about 3 billion years from now, as described in a fair amount of detail
by Paul Anderson in his story, Epilogue, which I think should have got a hero.
It was a beautiful job in which the formula part of it was explorers with the first faster
than light drive inadvertently taking full time to go where they went and they got back
about 3 billion years later.
But it was the theme was a very good one, which should be followed in more detail.
It was written shortly after that article in Scientific American, which talked about
self replicating machines, which would be set floating on the ocean to take minerals
and all supplies metals and so on from the water.
They would not only do this to be able to replicate themselves and put new little machines
which would grow, I use the variation of the theme later in the mechanic.
In Paul's story, the 3 billion years from now, the sun had climbed some distance among the
well above the main sequence as it probably will.
It was a good deal hotter.
Earth was no longer habitable for life of our type, but some of those machines had
survived, just mutated, and the chief character was a rather humanoid descendant of the machines.
And it was a damn good story and I still think it should have had a hero.
Well, that was the Earth's font there.
No vegetation left, browns, blacks, tans, areas that were sparkly, plant growths had,
I suppose, silicon cells, though Paul didn't exactly specify, but there was
an energy absorbing variety of life and a variety equivalent to animal life, though it had a few
abilities denied to us.
As some of the food it ate, instead of eating, it could take spare parts and insert them directly,
bypassing a lot of chemistry.
In fact, the chief character suffered injury during the story.
Got one of his forearms blown off.
His wife, I guess we can use the word, an immobile, almost immobile version of the machinery
was producing at the time and they were able to take a replacement arm from the unborn child and
fasten it onto daddy and just leave the child to cook a little longer.
And yeah, I like this story.
All right, let's go on.
Where again, this is part of a collaboration between Paul and me.
Somebody many years ago wrote a letter to John Campbell reminding him of the,
remember those twain triplet things, the petrified planet where three different authors were asked
to write a story about the same planet.
This one was one with silicon-based life surprise.
Let's follow, read to John Campbell and ask why some more of this wasn't done,
specifically suggesting that Paul and I be used.
John, being the sort of person he was, instantly Xeroxed the letter and sent copies to Paul and me.
And for the next five years or so, we corresponded, gradually building up a solar system,
planetary system.
I worked out the astronomy, he worked out the planetary ecology.
Each of us making suggestions to the other, but we were responsible for it that way.
The final question was where was this thing going to go?
It was a system with a G-type star, sun-type star with fairly earth-like planets,
or at least one fairly earth-like planet.
And the other member of the binary system was a somewhat more massive star,
which is now off the main sequence and gone up to a red giant stage.
And I worked out all the temperatures that would happen as the star moved around its orbit.
And then the question was where would it be in space?
Because red giants are highly luminous objects,
and we had to fit those into somebody's universe and explain why it hadn't been found from the earth.
It wasn't enormously far away.
And it wasn't, and I said, okay, let's put it right in front of a globular cluster,
where nobody will notice it from earth, at least for a few million years until we get out of line.
And Paul bought that, and this is a photo, excuse me, a painting of the system seen from
fairly close to. Some of you probably read the only story that's come out of this thing so far,
Paul's fire time.
Theoretically, I have equal rights in it, and someday I may write something about the same system,
but being a spare time writer, I haven't gotten around to it.
But again, there's an infinite number of variations here.
I'll probably write my stories on planets of the red giant,
which may have had life in the past, and in fact, or established as having had life in the past,
but they're going to be overcooked now, and I'm going to have my people walking around
in temperatures much too high for convenient life.
I'll think of something to happen, but I'll know when.
The next couple of pictures are illustrations from the same general thing.
Most of them are mine.
That's the planet, the Ishtar. Paul worked out the geography, the continent arrangement.
I did the picture as a present for him. This is set up close to fire time, a view from Ishtar's
moon with one side of it lighted by its own sun, and the other much more dimly lighted by the
approaching red giants. It's the reflection of the giant in the ocean here as you see the reflection
of the moon or sun from space. Okay.
Paul was the naming. He follows the tradition of using mythological
gods from this, that, or the other. Noth-tentheon was the word I want, religion anyway.
He named all the planets after the Babylonian bunch. He worked that very logically. I don't
remember enough Babylonian mythology now to figure out exactly what he did, but the planets
of the Fall-type star were named after children of one of the major gods, and the planets of
the other star were named after children of the other. He was very careful about that. I don't
remember them all now myself. That the landscape on the planets as fire time was coming, the regular
sun is setting and the red giant is in the sky, bringing its warnings of doom and all that to the
life forms. I should write a story or two on that planet as well. I can't say anyone do it
or want this time because it's not entirely my property to do it with, but if it weren't for
that I'd say go ahead. And if you want a system like that that isn't this same one,
write me, and I like to cook up planetary systems. I've done it for friends occasionally.
But the themes are endless. The one, the version that we cropped up with on this one,
and which Paul mentioned, and which can go on, was that the life on the planets of what is now a
red giant had had the other kind of amino acids, which ordinarily wouldn't happen, both wouldn't
happen on the same planet, I don't think, whichever one first developed replicating power would
take over the chemistry. But the intelligent beings from the red giant two or three billion
years ago before it was a red giant had colonized the planets of the yellow star, and traces of
their occupation still remain, whether the life forms were descendants of the intelligent
colonists or descendants of the bacteria they brought with them, I wouldn't know after four
billion years who would know. But this planet had life forms on it, some of which were
all the types of amino acid, and the others were the mirror image, which produced an ecology which
Paul had a great deal of fun with. Okay.
This was almost on the side, and it's a painting of mine as well, and it represents an ambition I
had never succeeded in fulfilling. That is not direct of Pauline VII, one of Doc Smith's characters,
it was partially fourth dimensional, and I want someday to paint a believable fourth dimensional
picture, but I just haven't succeeded yet. And I brought it in to mention that the fourth dimension
is used rather frequently, and has its own little infinity of story ideas, and I won't pursue that
one any further. There is a theme which has taken rather deep hold in the culture in the last 10
years or so, which also allows itself to be used in a variety of ways, especially playing the science
fiction game, capital letters. The game used to be that the author did his dam list to write a story
with no scientific errors in it, and after he had it published, the readers did the dam list to find
errors and write nasty letters to the editor's column. It is an unfair game. The author really is at
the short end of this stick. Once he's written and published the story, he's made all the moves he's
allowed, and everyone else can jump on him for the next 40 years of his bookstays in print,
God willing. There's a better way, and I will credit Gene Roddenberry for indirectly and not
deliberately, but as a result of his activities, teaching me that better way. Never mind shooting
down a Star Trek episode because it has a scientific error here and there. That is ethically
shooting a sitting bird. It is much better and much more of an intellectual exercise and much
more fun to take a Star Trek episode or a science fiction story, assume that it is accurate reporting
from soup to nuts, and then try to fill in the scientific background, the things that would
have to be true so that it could be accurate reporting. This is sometimes a job. The first
time I tackled it was the episode Dorothy Fontana's This Side of Paradise, which is a very nice,
earth-like planet in which everybody was perfectly healthy because of those damned spores,
which also were very efficient tranquilizers. And the only catch really, aside from the fact
that nobody ever said just what bare-fold rays were, that it was stated to be a planet of Omicron
City, specifically Omicron City 3. Omicron City is otherwise known as Myra, but it is a red,
eyes for human beings. And Circle Rat Sun was a challenge to repeat myself. I faced a talk on it
at the first of the New York Star Trek convention, the one where they were expecting maybe six or
800 and stopped counting at around 2500 and sort of started the theme. But the talk went
over well and I kept doing this for several years and it's great fun. And of course, every damn time
you fill in the background like this, there's about 500 more storylines. The next few slides
go through some of the ones that did and I'll be brief as I can. No, they don't either, for God.
That was a strictly decorated one which was inspired by, oh there, someone's from
Master, let's complete these. Milano, come on, I blanked.
I've got Lovecraft inspired one and I probably didn't mean to flip the slide in just that place,
but since it's there, it's there. And let's go on anyway. Lovecraft has his own infinity of the
branches that they threw at me first. And this was meant to branch us into the
idea of painting. This was about the point I was going to admit that I'd done some of these
paintings, but somebody beat me to the question. You can get emotional as well as scientific about
this. This was meant just through a sort of impressionistic painting, the title was Ion
Storm, and I'm quite sure that the Ion Storm in that particular Star Trek episode didn't look
like that, but it was fun to paint anyway. Somebody bought it, which is all of the good.
The next one I think is in the same general line.
Yeah, the skull doesn't show up as well on the slide as it did in the original painting. It's
called Chalador Passage and it came from James Schmitz's Witches of Paris.
And it was kind of fun to do. And someone bought that book. They do sometimes, okay.
And here I have to admit that I made mistakes as well. This is entitled Castor Close-Up,
and it reflects the idea I had of the castor system, for I'm embarrassed to admit most of my
professional life. And the only lucky thing is that I never did try to write a story on that
particular one. The idea is that castor as seen from Earth is a binary in any moderately good
telescope. You see this star and this star. Some distance away, there's a much fainter star,
castor C, YY Geminaurum, and the triple system. All three of the stars are spectroscopic binaries.
I have yacked for, I don't remember when we finally got started, but I'm sure it's been over an hour.
I will not feel hurt if anyone wants to go out, eat, suffer by an orange, buy some coffee.
On the other hand, I am perfectly willing to sit there and answer questions until the cows come
home or the committee says the room is needed for the next whatever is going on.
So here I am, here you are if you want to stay.
I'm going to get off my seat. Yes.
I would like to see the first Viking shot because they had, I guess, a PBS had some
sort of coverage. Many were discussed when they were coming. The first shot seemed to have a
sort of swirl effect in the atmosphere. This is Jupiter to Mars.
Well, don't remember the early Viking ones. I didn't see the TV presentation. When Marin and
9 first went by, Viking 1 and 2 were the recent landers. I didn't see those swirls,
I don't know. It could have been dust. Marin and 9, you remember when it first arrived,
had to wait a month before it could get any good pictures because of a practically
planet-wide dust storm. The pictures were very similar to the one you showed here, the Rocky
surface. It also had that swirl effect. They were very airplane. I haven't seen them, so I can't
offer one either. The Viking have measured them. Originally, from Marin and 4 along,
they were calculated from occultation effects. The radio beam from the probe, as it went behind
Mars, went through successively different deeper layers of atmosphere and they were able to get
some pretty precise stuff from that. But now they have direct pressures as well. Rather interesting.
The air is mostly carbon dioxide. During the time from the Vikings' landers' first measurements,
and the time they shut it off because Mars had gone beyond the sun, the total air pressure had
run down about 10%. The presumption was, it was winter at the North Pole and the atmosphere was
freezing out as CO2 in the North Polar ice cap. Wait a minute, North Pole, I was thinking.
No, it's South Pole in winter now. I'm sorry.
Carbon dioxide by far. Dry ice temperature under air pressure is about minus 78 Celsius.
Oxygen freezing point, I don't know exactly, but it's more like minus 200.
Yes.
This is quite possible. This is possibly what happened. The camera was taking a very narrow
spot image. The probe was spinning, I think, about three times a second. And the spot
trailed across the planet, whipped around, trailed across a slightly energization band and so on.
And I assume it was the sort of getting out of step which we suggested was produced for this sort of thing.
Tyson.
Would you think that the sunlight on that thing would also be blue?
Not if the reason is what it seems to be. If the color, the reddish or orange color which Titan
shows in the telescope is due to colored gases like oxides of nitrogen, then no, it's not a
scattering effect. It's an absorption effect and the light will be red regardless of the direction
you look. Orange or red. Have you taken high school chemistry and seen what happens when you drop
the copper into nitric acid, the political reddish brown stinking fumes that come off? That's the
stuff. In O2. We don't know that that's it, by the way, but it's about the simplest guess. Yes.
Uh, my background is, I didn't discover scientific fiction in 1950s. After I took on the
conversion project, I got science fiction. And I can remember feeling very different from you.
I read all this speculation about art because it seemed that I would never know.
Yeah.
You were reading back in the 30s that you have this. Why is he saying that he someday
would be giving a lecture with extra fiction?
I was firmly convinced of it. I have only recently and very reluctantly given up hope
of visiting the Moon and Mars personally. I have reached the age of 54 and it doesn't look as though
I would be able to pay for a passenger ticket to either place. And I know damn well I'm too old
to be taken as a pilot or researcher. I haven't flown an airplane for 23 years, let alone a rocket.
I'd love to go. I don't know what I'd give to go, but it would be most of what I own.
All I can say is I haven't drawn as raw a deal as for Willie Lay. He died a month before the
first moon landing. Yes.
You can delight you some progress that was very interesting. Trying to find a new
drive for a spaceship like possibly using the anti-gravity. I mean, you know,
the question there is a very, very hard one to answer. If you say someone like me says that he's
has his doubts about the possibility of anti-gravity, well, I risk letting my button sniffed off and
drummed out of the science fiction core. At the same time, I try to say this in a way to
justify my pessimism without sounding as though my imagination is completely disintegrated.
Anything like that would demand what we generally call a breakthrough. A genuinely new discovery
in the basic laws of physics. I don't say that this is impossible. I simply say there is no
way to evaluate its chance. And justifying the spending of public money on it is even more
difficult. I am greatly in favor of some millionaire who's got his own money and is interested in it.
Researching anti-gravity or flying saucers or astrology, if he wants. I just feel that none
of those things are probable enough, given what we know, think of as the rules of the game,
to justify a very large fraction of our available efforts being spent on them.
Yeah, its first one is rolled out. It was undergoing what you might call captive flight
tests, isn't it being pinned on top of a 747 or something like that, having its aerodynamic
qualities worked out. I don't know when its first orbital flight is scheduled for, but they're working
on it. I think they'll ever have a really a passage. I think eventually yes, granting the
continuation of our technological culture, which we may or may not manage to keep up. I happen to
be in favor of it strongly. I like my little pocket calculators and the intellectual exercises they
make possible. I'm quoting almost directly from my article on atomic power in the current Galileo
at the moment. I like to get much more crude about it. I much prefer toilet paper made for the
purpose to any of the substitutes I've had to use on the farm and in camping during my lifetime.
From all of those various levels, I am very much in favor of a highly technical culture. I like books.
Yeah, we have it. And while I suppose I might survive in one in which our technology was gone,
and 95% of the population would have to spend 18 hours a day muscle-powered dirt farming,
I don't think I'd enjoy it. I have done muscle-powered dirt farming. My uncles in Canada were farmers.
I used to spend the summer with them. And frankly, pulling turnips is a useful and noble
action, but it's not for me.
Yep.
I don't know what I would have to sell a year to make a living because I don't make my living at it.
I'm a high school science teacher and science fiction writing and science fiction painting
are paying hobbies. I am not particularly embarrassed, but I don't know if the answer is
very useful. Last year, between painting and selling, but the selling included money from
books like Mission of Gravity published 25 years ago, I grossed about $6,500 to $7,000,
or on the order, well, rather less than half my teaching salary. So I'm not living on science fiction.
Probably. I can't speak for all of them. I think Paul Anderson makes his entire living by writing,
but not entirely science fiction. Isaac Dezimov, of course, makes his living by writing, but
well, he's a special case. He shows withdrawal symptoms if you get in too far from a typewriter.
And most of the other science fiction people I know do not make their living at it. It's
more of a paying hobby as it is with me. I don't know. He sold well enough in his heyday,
so I rather suspect that he did and probably still does. His books are constantly being reprinted.
I mean, I got a modest but not refusable check for about 160 bucks two days ago
for Italian reprint rights for Mission of Gravity. Who am I to sneer at this?
That's why I say the answer may not be all that useful to you. In the beginning, you're not getting
this sort of thing. It's the sort of stuff that accumulates after you've been writing for years.
And maybe eventually I'd be able to retire on it, but fortunately I won't have to depend on it
even then. I'll have those are pension, school, pension, and I don't know if that'll allow me
to collect social security with all that other money rolling in, but I thought I won't need it.
Yeah.
Where's the portion of your story? You start with the science fiction idea and then build the story
around it. That's my technique as a rule. Even with the hard science fiction based on some peculiar
planet, there are still two ways to go at it. My more usual one is to start with the odd ball
planet. I see an article in Sky and Telescope about a peculiar star and I read it up and then I
start figuring, well, how far out would a planet have to be from this star to have an average
earth temperature and what peculiarities would the star produce if it were that far out? How can
I complicate the issue by tilting the axis or making the orbit a little bit eccentric? I had a
great deal of fun with my H225 at that point. I'll have a lot more in the 97s.
And eventually I've got a very peculiar environment which all sorts of odd ball things can happen
and then I can write mission of gravity. The alternative, which I am not so good at doing,
but which is perfectly kosher for playing the game, is to decide what sort of environment you
want for your story. You may even have a pretty good idea of the story already and you know,
the environment it needs and then cook up a planet which could have that environment and
cook up a planetary system in which such a planet could exist. And I would be perfectly
willing to do this if I happen to have the pertinent idea. Not too many science fiction writers
happen to have the background which lets them do this. I'm not bragging and simply mentioning that
not too many writers besides myself major in astronomy as undergraduates.
On the other hand, we're a fairly friendly bunch. We swap information with each other.
Isaac used to call me up on a rather regular basis when he was doing that science column for
what was it? Magazine of Science and Fantasy, I guess, Science Fiction and Fantasy. And he'd
always be calling me up, but he lived near Boston then checking up on astronomical
bits. He's a biochemist. He doesn't know all that much astronomy. In fact, I must regretfully say
that I had just reviewed his book on Alpha Centauri and he made a gross slip, but I won't tell you
what it is. Did you do the sort of scientific preparation for heating? Yes, so what did you do?
Much less. I read up on viruses and there wasn't a hell of a lot known about them in 1940,
which was when I was doing the research. I think it was about 40. Oh, it was earlier than that.
Wait a minute. Well, I got the idea about the summer of 45 and was fooling around picking up
information for the next three years or so. The first version of the story was finished in 48
and sent to John Campbell and he rejected it for a number of excellent reasons. And I did the 40,000
word two-part serial, sold it to him somewhere much later in 48 and it appeared first, I think,
in April and May 49. But the research there was entirely biological and not very much was known
about viruses in those days. So as we're in writing a sequel, as I'm supposed to be doing now, I'm
having to do a lot of covering, but I'm damned if I'll tell you where. A contract initially
said manuscript would be turned in September 1976. By September 1976, I had about 7,500 words done
and spills started. I started over again in Christmas vacation and did about 8,500 more words,
starting from scratch once more. Maybe I can use the first 7,500, but I've got a way to go yet.
The contract has been extended to September 77 and I hope I don't have to strengthen for another
extension. We might want their advance back instead. This would be bad.
Well, this happens and some people can get away with it. I lack the
drawl or self-confidence, whichever you want to call it, to feel sure that I'm one of them.
I have told my wife if she wants to go to her sisters in the Bahamas for spring vacation,
she may go and take our daughter with her. I'm not going. I'm staying home with the typewriter.
Whether two and a half weeks spring vacation will really produce the rest of the book is a
wide open question. But at least I keep getting more ideas and writing them down so maybe something
can happen this spring. I hope so. I'd like to get it off my conscience so I can feel I can do
something else. Yes.
Never. When I've written the, they typed out the final draft. What I told myself firmly is the
final draft. I can just barely bring myself to read it. There's some sort of acute postpartum
depression there. And when it comes out as a book, I feel even worse. I know there are things I
should have done otherwise. Take several years, usually before I can read the book of any sort of
comfort.
Yes. We've got a question here. Well, that's it. That's it. What time is it anyway? Okay.